
18
 Monthly Balance Adjustment 
 4.6   One challenge Xahau must manage is the additional expense of smart 
 contracts compared to normal XRPL transactions. 
 4.7   On the XRPL, transaction fees cost as little as one drop or 0.000001 XRP. Against 
 a total supply of 100 billion XRP, this is a trivial-but-sufficient cost. Hooks 
 transactions, on the other hand, can cost orders of magnitude more to set and 
 to trigger. Further, while every XRPL transaction is standardised, Hooks can vary 
 enormously in their complexity and cost. To properly protect itself against spam 
 and bloat from its Hooks, the Ledger must charge appropriately (and 
 dynamically) for the size and logic complexity of every Hook transaction. 
 4.8   The consequence is that, as a smart contract chain that burns fees, Xahau XRP 
 could easily be burned to near-zero, and certainly much more rapidly than 
 equivalent XRP would be burned on the XRPL, potentially leading to perverse 
 incentives to horde Xahau rather than use it to deploy and run Hooks. 
 4.9   To guard against these risks, Xahau needs a protocol-level mechanism that puts 
 burned tokens back into circulation, but one that does not simply incentivise 
 high fees. This is the purpose of the monthly balance adjustment. 
 4.10   The Monthly Balance Adjustment works as follows: 
 (a)   Each month, each Xahau account can choose to claim (against the 
 protocol) an adjustment based on their average Xahau XRP balance 
 (computed since the last adjustment). The adjusted amount is the 
 equivalent of 4% p.a. compounded (roughly 0.34% per month). 
 (b)   Users can claim their balance adjustment by sending a  RewardClaim 
 transaction to the Genesis account at any time provided 30 days has 
 passed since the last claim. Doing so demonstrates they are an active 
 user. 
 (c)   Upon receipt of the claim transaction, the protocol, via the 
 BalanceRewards  and  XahauGenesis  amendments, increases  the user’s 
 account balance by the balance adjustment. 
 (d)   Unclaimed balance adjustments are foregone as a penalty for inactivity. 
 (e)   4% is the initial rate at launch, but it can be changed via the Governance 
 Game if it proves too small or too large in the future. 
 4.11   This mechanism allows active users to claim a monthly adjustment that puts 
 further Xahau XRP into circulating supply, mitigating the risk of the token being 
 burned down to zero through smart contract execution fees. 
 Page |  9 
 Monthly Governance Validator Rewards 
 4.12   The Xahau Genesis Account is enabled with a Hook that controls, among other 
 things, the emission of Xahau XRP. This Hook needs a governance arrangement 
 so that it can be monitored, amended, and/or replaced in the face of 
 changing network and real-world conditions. 
 4.13   It is well known that XRPL mainnet validators do not receive any kind of reward 
 for the services they provide for underpinning the mainnet Ledger. However, 
 infrastructure costs money to run, and real-world experience shows that this lack 
 of incentive leads to a lack of actively managed validators. 
 4.14   The Xahau Genesis Hook needs to know, or be told, which accounts it must trust 
 when deciding whether to update itself. So, those accounts must be known in 
 advance, rather than emerging from the overlapping UNLs. 
 4.15   The technical solution to this problem is an incentivised Genesis Hook 
 Governance Game that rewards certain Validators for overseeing the Hook. It 
 works as follows: 
 (a)   There are 20 “Seats” on the Genesis Hook Governance Game. 
 (b)   Each Seat is controlled either by a single Xahau Account (Level 1) or a 
 self-managing committee of 3-20 Accounts (Level 2). 
 (c)   For each occupied Seat, the protocol mints and distributes 1/20  th  of the 
 total Monthly Balance Adjustments claimed that month. 
 (d)   If a Seat is held by a committee of Accounts, the rewards for that Seat 
 are split in a manner of that committee’s choosing. 
 (e)   If no users claim a Balance Adjustment that month no rewards are paid to 
 any validators. 
 (f)   Each Flag Ledger (256 ledgers) an on-ledger record called a  UNLReport  is 
 generated. This report contains a list of validators’ public keys that 80% of 
 other validators believe participated adequately in consensus since the 
 previous Flag Ledger. The Genesis Hook will only distribute validator 
 rewards to Seats that correspond to the public keys of validators on the 
 UNLReport. 
 4.16   Thus, the Genesis Hook Governance Game includes a reward mechanism 
 designed to ensure that trusted accounts are rewarded for running trustworthy 
 validators, that those rewards are linked to user activity, and that those rewards 
 put new Xahau XRP into distribution, mitigating the risk of a token liquidity 
 crunch from high smart contract execution fees. 
 Page |  10 
 5.   Burn2Mint Liquidity Solution 
 5.1   While the XRPL ecosystem currently operates on a single chain, the ecosystem 
 will soon expand to encompass multiple parallel chains, like the Ripple/Peersyst 
 EVM sidechain and Xahau. These sidechains will offer enhanced scalability, 
 flexibility, and interoperability, fostering a more diverse and dynamic ecosystem 
 for XRP and related digital assets. 
 5.2   As a sidechain, Xahau Ledger must be capable of inter-chain value exchange 
 with the XRPL. Xahau will enable that value exchange with the XRPL via a 
 Burn2Mint liquidity portal that allows users to clone their XRP account address 
 on Xahau and burn XRP on XRPL mainnet in return for a matching number of 
 Xahau XRP in their cloned account on Xahau. This section explains the 
 Burn2Mint function and why it was adopted ahead of other mechanisms. 
 Existing Mechanisms and Their Flaws 
 5.3   There are several existing mechanisms for cross-chain value transfer, but each 
 has specific drawbacks as follows: 
 (a)   Centralised Exchanges:  Centralised exchanges (CEXs)  offer opaque 
 liquidity on more than one chain. Most users will use a CEX to obtain their 
 first coins on a new chain, and these are an important but centralised 
 part of the ecosystem. Reliance on CEXs is a centralising factor in an 
 ecosystem. 
 (b)   Layer 2 Bridges:  Layer 2 bridges are semi-decentralised  custodial lending 
 or wrapping services. Locking up collateral on one chain allows the user 
 to borrow against it on the second chain. Returning funds on the second 
 chain unlocks the collateral on the first chain. These services are 
 honeypots that attract exploits. Further, they have a lack of legal clarity in 
 many jurisdictions, including clarity on the legal role of the operators on 
 the bridge and the status of the locked coins. 
 (c)   Atomic Swaps:  If two chains support hash time lock  contracts, then an 
 atomic swap could be used to transfer value between the chains. In this 
 protocol two users wanting to perform opposite trades are match-made. 
 The protocol ensures that either both trades occur, or both do not. Atomic 
 swaps have three drawbacks. First, if the counterparty does not perform 
 their trade the first party must wait for the time-lock expiry. Secondly, a 
 critical mass of users on both chains must exist so that users wishing to 
 swap can always find a counterparty wishing to make the opposite trade. 
 Finally, if the directionality of the trading is generally in one direction it 
 may not be possible to find counterparties. 
 5.4   While none of the above mechanisms are precluded by Burn2Mint – that is, all 
 are a possible feature of Xahau in the future – Burn2Mint is a native cross-chain 
 value transfer mechanism that is immediately available and avoids all the 
 identified drawbacks. 
 Page |  11 
 Burn2Mint Mechanism - Burning XRP on the XRPL 
 5.5   Xahau’s Burn2Mint allows a user with an account on the XRPL mainnet to clone 
 that Account on Xahau (same  r-address  and same private  key/s) and then 
 burn XRP on the XRPL mainnet via an arbitrarily high transaction fee and mint a 
 matching number of Xahau XRP into their cloned Account on Xahau. 
 5.6   This mechanism involves the following steps: 
 (a)   Burn Fees on XRPL  : The first step involves burning  a certain amount of XRP 
 on the XRPL by executing an  AccountSet  transaction  with an arbitrarily 
 high fee. Once the transaction is validated, the high fee now represents 
 burnt (i.e. the irreversible destruction of) XRP. This XRP is removed from 
 circulation on the XRPL and can never be recovered based on current 
 ledger rules. 
 (b)   Generating an XPOP (Proof of Burn)  : Using a special  client that listens to 
 XRPL for Burn2Mint transactions and the validation messages for the 
 ledgers they appear in, an XPOP (see: XLS41) is generated for the 
 transaction. The XPOP is a non-interactive offline cryptographic proof that 
 the transaction was applied on the XRPL. Any party with an XPOP verifier 
 can verify that the burn happened. 
 (c)   Minting on Xahau  : The XPOP of the burn transaction  is submitted to Xahau 
 using an  Import  transaction. The Import transaction  must be performed on 
 Xahau by the clone Account (same  r-address  and same  private key/s) of 
 the XRP Account that initiated the burn transaction. The XPOP is 
 converted into a hex blob and supplied as a field in the Import 
 transaction. If all conditions are met Xahau now mints the required 
 number of Xahau XRP to the Xahau Account. 
 (d)   B2M Ratio Schedule:  The amount of Xahau XRP minted  in response to 
 each XRP burned is determined by the B2M Ratio Schedule. The B2M 
 Ratio Schedule starts at parity - 1 XRP burned mints 1 Xahau XRP - for the 
 first 2 million ledgers from launch. It then reduces smoothly with every 
 ledger closed - each XRP burned mints progressively less Xahau XRP - for 
 the next 28 million ledgers, until the Burn2Mint function self-terminates 
 after the 30 millionth ledger from launch. 
 Xahau’s B2M Ratio Schedule 
 Xahau Ledgers Closed Since 
 Genesis Amendment Activated 
 B2M Ratio 
 XRP Burned : Xahau XRP Minted 
 First 2 million ledgers   1:1 
 Next 28  million ledgers   1 XRP burned mints 1/28 millionth 
 less Xahau XRP per ledger closed 
 After the 30 millionth ledger from 
 launch 
 Burn2Mint disabled - no further 
 minting possible 
 Page |  12 
 (e)   Cloning Account on Xahau Ledger  : The  Import  transaction is special 
 because it can be submitted using an Account that does not yet exist on 
 Xahau. If the clone Account does not yet exist on Xahau, it will be 
 created as part of the minting process, and the network will credit the 
 Account with 2 Xahau XRP, which covers the account reserve (1 Xahau 
 XRP) and 5 ledger objects, for free, to get started. If the Account is 
 created but Xahau is uncertain about its keying (because a RegularKey 
 or SignerList was used) then the account will be created in a blackholed 
 state. If the Account already exists on Xahau then the ImportSequence 
 number on the AccountRoot is verified against the Sequence in the burn 
 transaction (which is embedded inside the XPOP) to prevent replay 
 attacks. Upon successful Burn2Mint the ImportSequence is updated to 
 reflect the most recently submitted XPOP for this account. 
 (f)   Key Synchronization  : The keying information for an account on the XRPL 
 may also be imported to Xahau at any time, at the user’s discretion. This is 
 done by using a  SetRegularKey  or  SignerListSet  transaction  on the XRPL 
 mainnet and then generating an XPOP from it. If the user does not wish to 
 change their keys on mainnet then they must repeat their existing 
 RegularKey or SignerList within the relevant transaction (thus executing 
 the transaction but not making any changes to the account keying). The 
 XPOP can then be used with the  Import  transaction  on Xahau to transfer 
 the mainnet keying to the same account on Xahau. This is useful for 
 multisign accounts, vanity addresses and for accounts with a 
 compromised master key. 
 5.7   Together, these steps allow a user, if they ever so choose, to clone their existing 
 XRPL account on Xahau and to mint Xahau XRP into that clone account by 
 burning XRP on mainnet via transaction fees. The process both guarantees the 
 XRP has been burned and that both accounts are controlled by the same 
 person. 
 5.8   Anybody wishing to convert Xahau XRP back into mainnet XRP can do so by 
 trading it through a centralised exchange in lieu of other technical solutions 
 (bridges, atomic swaps or a reverse path Burn2Mint, if the Import amendment 
 goes live on the XRPL mainnet) being implemented. 
 Benefits of Burn2Mint 
 5.9   Burn2Mint function has several important benefits: 
 (a)   Decentralised:  No one can block access to the Burn2Mint  mechanism, 
 and no authorization is needed to use it. For some users, in some cases, 
 Burn2Mint may be the only legal option to obtain liquidity on Xahau. 
 Page |  13 
 (b)   Self-sovereign Liquidity  : Both sides of the Burn2Mint mechanism can (and 
 should) run on the user’s own infrastructure. The user burns XRP on their 
 own infrastructure, generates and submits the XPOP to their own 
 infrastructure, and thereby also mints the Xahau XRP on their own 
 infrastructure. Aside from being decentralised and censorship proof, this 
 means that everyone, but particularly exchanges and businesses, can 
 freely decide when and how much XRP to move to Xahau. They provide 
 their own liquidity to themselves, on demand, on their own infrastructure. 
 (c)   Non-Custodial  : Burnt XRP ceases to exist on the chain  on which it was 
 burnt. Because it no longer exists, the burnt XRP cannot become 
 someone else’s property, it cannot be held in trust, nor in a “Door” 
 account, nor in some sort of custodial or escrow arrangement. Therefore, 
 Burn2Mint is truly non-custodial and there is no counterparty or 
 intermediary. 
 (d)   Exploit-Resistant  : Burn2Mint XPOPs rely on the same  trust mechanics that 
 secure the XRPL, in particular validators keys and validator list keys. As a 
 result, the Burn2Mint mechanism is at least as secure as the network itself 
 against witness (i.e. validator) hijacking and tampering. 
 (e)   Key Free  : In a traditional two-way bridge, a “Door”  account containing 
 users’ locked funds is maintained by some set of signing keys or witness 
 keys. This means there are keys  somewhere  that could  be used to gain 
 unauthorized access to the “Door” account and exploit the bridge by 
 distributing users’ locked funds to an unauthorized third party. By contrast 
 the Burn2Mint solution does not use a “Door” account, and thus there are 
 no keys and no locked funds to hack. 
 Impact on XRPL 
 5.10   Burn2Mint effectively gives every XRP holder the option to port their XRP to 
 Xahau. That option will be valuable and useful to the extent Xahau’s smart 
 contract features mean the market prices Xahau XRP higher than XRP on 
 mainnet. The progressive “halvening” of the B2M ratio and eventual disabling of 
 the B2M mechanism prevents any risk that all XRP might be burned in this way. 
 5.11   Enterprise users may be better served using centralised exchanges to purchase 
 the Xahau XRP they need. If the market values Xahau XRP the same as XRP on 
 mainnet this would imply sufficient liquidity of each token exists to meet user 
 demand. 
 Page |  14 
 Burn2Mint Summary 
 5.12   Burn2Mint is a novel cross chain value transfer mechanism for XRPL protocol 
 and PoA-backed chains. The mechanism involves a value transfer primitive that 
 is self-sovereign, secure, and avoids many of the legal and technical pitfalls 
 associated with traditional value transfer methods. Its inclusion in the ecosystem 
 adds a native, decentralised option to transfer value from the XRPL without a 
 counterparty and without custody. 
 6.   Xahau Governance Game 
 6.1   XRP Ledger Consensus Protocol (Previously: Ripple Protocol Consensus 
 Algorithm) chains rely on a robust overlap in validator UNLs to define the 
 canonical ledger. If a validator does not trust enough of the same machines 
 that everyone else trusts, they risk unknowingly listening to an irrelevant fork of 
 the ledger. Determining the best UNL is a matter of social (off-chain) consensus. 
 6.2   To assist that social consensus, various entities publish dUNLs – lists of validators 
 everyone should follow. Xahau will follow the same approach, with the XRPL 
 Foundation and others expected to publish such lists. So, like the XRPL, Xahau 
 will be a public permissionless chain for which anyone can run a validator. And 
 like the XRPL, any update of the protocol will be dependent on more than 80% 
 of UNL validators supporting the changes, in the same manner as the XRPL. 
 6.3   While the dUNL helps define the validators responsible for the canonical Ledger, 
 Xahau has a second governance challenge, not present in the XRPL mainnet: 
 the governance of its Genesis Hook. The XRPL mainnet minted all of its XRP on 
 creation. Xahau cannot follow this approach. Its native token needs to be 
 minted in response to the happening of predefined events (i.e. Burn2Mint, 
 Account Adjustments, Validator Rewards.) It uses a Hook on its Genesis Account 
 to achieve this. 
 6.4   This means Xahau needs a governance mechanism for its Genesis Hook in case 
 the Hook needs to be adjusted or replaced. This is known as the Governance 
 Game: 
 (a)   Purpose:  The Governance Game exists to ensure that  the UNL validators 
 remain active and allows those active members to maintain the Hook on 
 the Genesis account that controls the distribution of Xahau XRP. 
 (b)   Seats:  There are 20 Seats at a table. A Seat is a  Xahau Account whose 
 vote counts in the Governance Game. 
 (c)   L1 Table  : The Governance Game requires at least the  top-level table. This 
 is called the Level 1 table (L1 Table). This table by definition exists only on 
 the Genesis account according to the Governance Game Hook installed 
 there. A seat at the L1 table may be filled by an Account or may be 
 empty. These seats are called L1s. 
 Page |  15 
 (d)   L2 Table:  An L1 seat may itself be filled by an Account which has another, 
 different, Governance Hook installed on it. The seats at this table are 
 called L2s, and the table is an L2 Table. The structure is a  self-managing 
 committee of 3-20 Accounts that collectively control the L1 seat and its 
 voting rights. Thus up to 400 Accounts may be involved in the two layer 
 Governance game, depending on the mix of L1 and L2 Seats. 
 (e)   Filling Seats:  L1 Seats are filled or vacated by 80%  vote of all existing filled 
 L1 Seats. For L2 Seats, the committee of Accounts that collectively holds 
 that L1 Seat invites or disinvites new members (up to a maximum or 20 
 and down a minimum of 3) by majority vote, or according to whatever 
 other logic or rules they deem fit. No other Seats have any control over 
 the members of an L2 Table. 
 (f)   Voting:  Each L1 Seat has 1 vote in the Governance  Game. For  L2 Seats, 
 the single vote of its L2 table is determined by whatever logic that L2 
 table decides. The default is more than 50% vote of the L2 Seat members 
 at that L2 table. 
 (g)   Hook Changes:  All changes to the Hook are voted on  via the 
 Governance Game. A Hook change is only successful if supported by the 
 defined % vote of all Seats. The regular vote is 80%, but for the increase of 
 the rate of balance adjustment it is 100%. 
 (h)   Rewards:  To incentivise L1 Seats to run reliable validators,  L1 Seats earn 
 monthly Rewards provided they actively participate in consensus. 
 (i)   Foundation of dUNL:  The validators run by those participating  in the 
 Genesis Hook Governance Game should form the foundation of any 
 dUNL, as any Seat that performs unreliably risks being voted out by the 
 other Seats. 
 6.5   The different types of Seats allow for a greater diversity of participating 
 Accounts without undermining security. Level 1 Seats are suitable to Accounts 
 controlled by significant entities the community can trust, while Layer 2 Seats 
 allow a broader pool of participants, but since their collective participation 
 counts as 1 vote, their numbers do not overwhelm the trust placed in Level 1 
 Seats. 
 6.6   Thus, the Governance Game allows up to 400 Accounts to participate and 
 rewards those Accounts for doing so provided they also participate in 
 consensus by running a reliable validator. 
 7.   The Xahau Launch Alliance 
 7.1   Xahau has been developed by an alliance of 5 independent entities with a 
 track record of building on and supporting the XRPL ecosystem. Those entities 
 are as follows: 
 Page |  16 
 (a)   XRPL Labs (Xaman), the software developer behind the XUMM wallet, 
 Hooks, and  Xahaud  that has carried most of the expertise  and cost of 
 developing Xahau. 
 (b)   GateHub Limited, a multinational technology company, crypto 
 exchange, and crypto service provider, including Stablecoins issued on 
 the XRPL. 
 (c)   Titanium OU, an IT consulting and infrastructure firm specialising in 
 providing secure hosting and a major provider of the infrastructure for the 
 XRPL (as  Alloy Networks  ). 
 (d)   Evernode Labs Ltd, the developer of the Evernode smart contract project 
 and responsible for deploying it to Xahau. 
 (e)   Digital Governing OU, an incorporated entity associated with a globally 
 active firm for accounting, audit, and legal services. 
 8.   Launch Fully Functional & Decentralised 
 8.1   Xahau will launch fully functional and decentralised without raising funds. 
 No Centralised Control 
 8.2   Xahau will launch with 8 of its 20 Governance Game Seats filled: 
 (a)   5 will be Layer 1 Seats, each filled by a member of the Xahau Launch 
 Alliance. 
 (b)   3 will be Layer 2 Tables, one of which will be filled by a committee of 
 Exchanges and the other a diverse committee of XRP community 
 projects, developers, and long-term supporters. 
 (c)   1 will be FYEO, a company offering code audit and review services on 
 blockchain development, including software such as Hooks. 
 No Funds Being Raised 
 8.3   There is no ICO, and no funds are being raised from the launch. 
 8.4   The Xahau Alliance members have each independently funded their own 
 development efforts. There’s no communal funding, nor any pooling of money 
 or resources for the further development of Xahau. Nor is there any roadmap, or 
 “Xahau Foundation”, or other centralised treasury. Any further development is 
 wholly at the discretion of independent actors within the ecosystem. 
 Page |  17 
 No Promises 
 8.5   The Governance Game members are independent entities. There is no 
 agreement, arrangement, or understanding between them about how to cast 
 their vote, deploy their resources, or use their assets, including any Xahau XRP. It 
 is only the logic of the Game – be a trustworthy Validator in the eyes of the 
 other members or be voted out of the Game – that drives Validator behaviour. 
 This is an inherent feature of the XRP Ledger Consensus Protocol (Previously: 
 Ripple Protocol Consensus Algorithm) (PoA) mechanism Xahau uses. 
 No Further Features Needed 
 8.6   While software, by its nature, needs to be maintained, there are no essential 
 functionalities missing from  Xahaud  or in need of  further development for the 
 software to be useful as a smart contract sidechain of the XRPL. 
 Page |  18 